add rfc for migrating to dotnet-script from scriptcs (#804)
OctopusDeploy/blog: blog/2022-q3/migrate-from-scriptcs-to-dotnet-script/index.md

## Impacts

One of the tradeoffs of this change would be that C# scripting would no longer be available on Linux deployment targets using SSH with Mono. If you wish to run C# scripts against your SSH linux targets, you would need to reconfigure your SSH targets to use the self-contained Calamari which runs via netcore3.1. To do this select the Self-Contained Calamari target runtime on your SSH target, a guide can be found [here](https://octopus.com/docs/infrastructure/deployment-targets/linux/ssh-target#self-contained-calamari). Targets using the Linux tentacle will continue to work as they always have.

The other tradeoff we would make with this change is that `dotnet-script` only works with netcore3.1 and above. This would mean C# scripting will be unavailable to deployments against Windows Tentacles installed on versions of Windows earlier than 2012 R2, as these run Full .NET Framework builds of Calamari. 

> ## Workarounds

Reviewer: Nice! I think I'd prefer this section to be called "Migration" rather than "Workarounds" though.

refreshenv
choco install scriptcs -y
refreshenv
```

Once ScriptCS is installed on the machine you can copy your C# Script into the following powershell template and run your existing scripts.

```powershell
$ScriptContent = @"
Console.WriteLine(Env.ScriptArgs[0]);
"@

New-Item -Path . -Name "ScriptFile.csx" -ItemType "file" -Value $ScriptContent

scriptcs ScriptFile.csx -- $OctopusParameters["Octopus.Deployment.Id"]
```

Alternatively you can [download the ScriptCS nuget package](https://community.chocolatey.org/api/v2/package/ScriptCs/0.17.1), rezip the tools folder and use this as a [step package](https://octopus.com/blog/script-step-packages) by calling the executable directly.

```powershell
./tools/tools/scriptcs.exe ScriptFile.csx -- $OctopusParameters["Octopus.Deployment.Id"]
```

:::hint
With these changes paramaters used in the C# script must be passed in through the ScriptCS arguments and referenced by Env.ScriptArgs[Index] inside the ScriptContent. 
:::

> ### Added functionality

Reviewer: It feels like this sectino should be above the migrations section, within the H2 "Impacts" section.

Author: I've moved this up, along with the Benefits of the proposed approach, I think they fit together. Matt and I had a bit of a re-review before I saw this feedback and we rewrote the (Workarounds/Migration) section.

---
title: Request for Comments - Migrating from scriptcs to dotnet-script
description: Provide your feedback on the proposed migration.
author: isaac.calligeros@octopus.com
visibility: public
published: 2021-07-05-1400
metaImage: blogimage-feedback_2022-q3.png
bannerImage: blogimage-feedback_2022-q3.png
bannerImageAlt: Octopus salesperson at laptop with headset and icons representing customer feedback
isFeatured: false
tags:
 - Engineering
 - Product
---

We've received [user feedback](https://help.octopus.com/t/consider-use-dotnet-script-vs-scriptcs/22144) and [voting](https://octopusdeploy.uservoice.com/forums/170787-general/suggestions/31454668-allow-the-use-of-c-script-csx-using-net-core) requesting an update of the Calamari C# script executor from [scriptcs](https://github.com/scriptcs/scriptcs) to [dotnet-script](https://github.com/filipw/dotnet-script). This unlocks newer language features, referencing NuGet packages directly from within a script and removes our dependency on Mono for linux deployment targets.

> This request for comments aims to gather feedback on the demand for this functionality and raise awareness of the tradeoffs in deprecating scriptcs. C# Scripting accounts for ~5% of our script steps and most instances of Calamari run on netcore 3.1 meaning this change is likely to only affect a small subset of customers.  The deployment targets affected by this change are linux targets using SSH with Mono enabled and Tentacles running on windows versions earlier than 2012R2. This is a breaking change for these customers running C# scripting and it's important to us to understand who is likely to be affected and help update these deployment processes. Any and all feedback would be appreciated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This request for comments aims to gather feedback on the demand for this functionality and raise awareness of the tradeoffs in moving to dotnet-script, and deprecating scriptcs. C# Scripting account for ~5% of our script steps, so we want to ensure we understand the impact this change could have on our users.  

If you ar using C# scripts in your deployment processes, and are deploying to Linux targets using SSH and Mono, or to Windows tentacle targets running Windows versions earlier than 2012R2, the proposed changes could impact you.
```

> ## How we propose to support established dotnet-script

Reviewer: Is this worded correctly?

> This Request for Comments (RFC) proposes removing scriptcs in favour of dotnet-script. In doing so C# scripting will no longer be available  on Linux deployment targets using SSH, this can be resolved by using the self-contained Calamari which runs on netcore3.1. (Note check this final statement)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This RFC proposes removing `scriptcs` in favour of `dotnet-script`. 

One of the tradeoffs of this change is that C# scripting will no longer be available on Linux deployment targets using SSH with Mono. If you wish to run C# scripts against your SSH linux targets, you will need to reconfigure your SSH targets to use the self-contained Calamari which runs via netcore3.1. Targets using the Linux tentacle will continue to work as they always have. (Note check this final statement)
```

> This Request for Comments (RFC) proposes removing scriptcs in favour of dotnet-script. In doing so C# scripting will no longer be available  on Linux deployment targets using SSH, this can be resolved by using the self-contained Calamari which runs on netcore3.1. (Note check this final statement)

Reviewer: I feel like we need to set a little more technical context here - the fact that Calamari is the thing that executes deployment scripts, and is the host for any C# scripts that execute during deployment.

Reviewer: Nice , that is great!

> Calamari currently supports .Net Framework 4.0.0, 4.5.2 and Core 3.1 while dotnet-script only supports Core 3.1 and above. This means C# scripting will also be unavailable to deployments working with Tentacles installed on versions of Windows earlier than 2012R2, these run the Framework builds of Calamari. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The other tradeoff we would make with this change is that `dotnet-script` only works with dotnet core 3.1 and above. This would mean C# scripting will be unavailable to deployments against Windows Tentacles installed on versions of Windows earlier than 2012 R2, as these run Full .NET Framework builds of Calamari. 
```

### Added functionality
| Feature                               | scriptcs          | dotnet-script    |
|---------------------------------------|-------------------|------------------|
| C# Version                            | 5                 | 8                |

> | Removes Mono Depdency                 | ❌                | ✅              |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Removes Mono Depedency for Linux                 | ❌                | ✅              |
```

| Nuget import support                  | ❌                | ✅              |
| Allows future .Net 5 & 6 support      | ❌                | ✅              |

## Benefits of the proposed approach

All C# language features included up to version [8](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/whats-new/csharp-8) are now available for use in your C# scripts.

Removing the dependency on Mono to execute scripts brings us inline with modern cross platform .Net framework capabilities reducing the complexity of calling into Mono and related issues.

The Nuget import support from dotnet-script allows for the direct referencing of a nuget package in a script without having to [include the dll in the in the scripts packages](https://octopus.com/docs/octopus-rest-api/octopus.client/using-client-in-octopus). The new approach can be seen below.

```
#r "nuget: RestSharp, 108.0.1"

using RestSharp;
  
var client = new RestClient("https://pokeapi.co/api/v2/");
var request = new RestRequest("pokemon/ditto");
var response = await client.ExecuteGetAsync(request);
Console.WriteLine(response.Content);
```

> dotnet-script supports .Net 5 and 6, this should help towards future upgrades of Calamari and allow the use of the latest language features in your scripts.

Reviewer: I feel like this is a bit of a duplicate of the c#8 feature paragraph above.

Author: Removed

## When will this be released?

> We are still considering how many existing deployment processes this change is likely to affect. The reliability of your deployments are our main priority and as such we don't have an immediate plan to release these changes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We are still evaluating how many users this change is likely to affect. We will not make or release the proposed changes until we have a clear picture of who we will impact, and what actions those who are impacted would need to take.
```

## We want your feedback

> We're still planning the second milestone, so now is a great time to help shape this new feature with your feedback. We have created a [GitHub issue to capture the discussion](https://github.com/OctopusDeploy/StepsFeedback/issues/7).

Reviewer: Need to adjust this paragraph.

Specifically, we want to know:

- Will the limitations of Linux SSH targets or Windows versions older than 2012R2 affect you?
- If so can you foresee any challenges that may stop you from upgrading these deployment targets or using alternative scripting languages?
- Do the newer language features, easier NuGet package reference, and added reliability in removing Mono justify these changes?

This feedback will help us deliver the best solution we can.

<span><a class="btn btn-success" href="https://github.com/OctopusDeploy/StepsFeedback/issues/7">Provide feedback</a></span>

## Conclusion

> In summary, the migration from ScriptCS to dotnet script includes results in the following changes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In summary, the migration from `ScriptCS` to `dotnet-script` includes results in the following changes:
```

- C# scripting deprecated for Linux SSH targets running Mono
- C# scripting deprecated for Windows deployment targets running on versions earlier than 2012R2

> - Support for language features up to C# 8 from C# 5

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Increase support for language features from C# 5 to C# 8
```

- Direct imports of Nuget packages in scripts

> - Removal of Mono dependence for calling scripts

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Removal of Mono requirement for running C# scripts on Linux targets
```

This request for comments (RFC) aims to gather feedback on the demand for this functionality and raise awareness of the tradeoffs in moving to dotnet-script, and deprecating ScriptCS. C# Scripting account for ~5% of our script steps, so we want to ensure we understand the impact this change could have on our users.

If you are using C# scripts in your deployment processes, and are deploying to Linux targets using SSH and Mono, or to Windows tentacle targets running Windows versions earlier than 2012 R2, the proposed changes could impact you.

## How we propose to support dotnet-script

This RFC proposes removing `ScriptCS` in favour of `dotnet-script`.

> To deploy software to your server we use [Tentacle](https://github.com/OctopusDeploy/OctopusTentacle), a lightweight service responsible for communicating with Octopus Server, and invoking [Calamari](https://github.com/OctopusDeploy/Calamari). Calamari is a command-line tool which knows how to perform the deployment, and is the host process for all deployment actions including script execution.

Reviewer 2: Eg:

> ## How we propose to support dotnet-script
> This RFC proposes... _etc_
>
> To deploy software.. _etc_
>
> `ScriptCS` is an old app built on the full .NET Framework, so in order to execute it on Linux targets, we require you to have Mono installed... _etc_
>
> `dotnet-script` is a modern implementation of C# scripting, built on `dotnet`, and so can run on all targets that support `dotnet` apps. The earliest Windows version that supports `dotnet-script` is Windows Server 2012 R2... _etc_
>
> ### Impacts we anticipate
> * C# scripting would no longer be available on Linux deployment targets configured to use SSH with Mono. If you wish to... _mitigation, etc_
> * C# scripting would no longer be available to deployments against Windows Tentacles installed on versions of Windows earlier than 2012 R2, as these run Full .NET Framework builds of Calamari. If you wish to... _mitigation, etc_

> To deploy software to your server we use [Tentacle](https://github.com/OctopusDeploy/OctopusTentacle), a lightweight service responsible for communicating with Octopus Server, and invoking [Calamari](https://github.com/OctopusDeploy/Calamari). Calamari is a command-line tool which knows how to perform the deployment, and is the host process for all deployment actions including script execution.

Author: 👍 Sounds good, looking at it again this added context on the two tools should really tie it all together. I'll update in a moment, just trying to work through an implementation detail and want to understand it first 🙂

> To deploy software to your server we use [Tentacle](https://github.com/OctopusDeploy/OctopusTentacle), a lightweight service responsible for communicating with Octopus Server, and invoking [Calamari](https://github.com/OctopusDeploy/Calamari). Calamari is a command-line tool which knows how to perform the deployment, and is the host process for all deployment actions including script execution.

Author: I've made some changes along these lines, let me know what you think 🙂

All C# language features included up to version [8](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/whats-new/csharp-8) are now available for use in your C# scripts.

Removing the dependency on Mono to execute scripts brings us inline with modern cross platform .NET capabilities reducing the complexity of calling into Mono and related issues.

The Nuget import support from `dotnet-script` allows for the direct referencing of a nuget package in a script without having to [include the dll in the in the scripts packages](https://octopus.com/docs/octopus-rest-api/octopus.client/using-client-in-octopus). The new approach can be seen below.

```
#r "nuget: RestSharp, 108.0.1"

using RestSharp;
  
var client = new RestClient("https://pokeapi.co/api/v2/");
var request = new RestRequest("pokemon/ditto");
var response = await client.ExecuteGetAsync(request);
Console.WriteLine(response.Content);
```

## When will this be released?

We are still evaluating how many users this change is likely to affect. We will not make or release the proposed changes until we have a clear picture of who we will impact, and what actions those who are impacted would need to take.

## We want your feedback

> We're still considering this change, so now is a great time to help shape this proposal with your feedback. We have created a [GitHub issue to capture the discussion](https://github.com/OctopusDeploy/StepsFeedback/issues/7).

Reviewer 2: GitHub issue here would need to be changed before publishing

Specifically, we want to know:

- Will the limitations of Linux SSH targets or Windows versions older than 2012R2 affect you?
- If so can you foresee any challenges that may stop you from upgrading these deployment targets or using alternative scripting languages?
- Do the newer language features, easier NuGet package reference, and added reliability in removing Mono justify these changes?

This feedback will help us deliver the best solution we can.

<span><a class="btn btn-success" href="https://github.com/OctopusDeploy/StepsFeedback/issues/7">Provide feedback</a></span>

## Conclusion

In summary, the migration from `ScriptCS` to `dotnet-script` includes results in the following changes:

- C# scripting deprecated for Linux SSH targets running Mono
- C# scripting deprecated for Windows deployment targets running on versions earlier than 2012R2
- Increase support for language features from C# 5 to C# 8
- Direct imports of Nuget packages in scripts
- Removal of Mono requirement for running C# scripts on Linux targets

Thanks for reading this RFC. We hope you're as excited about the proposed migration to `dotnet-script` as we are.

> Any [feedback](https://github.com/OctopusDeploy/StepsFeedback/issues/7) you have is greatly appreciated.

Reviewer 2: and here

If you are using C# scripts in your deployment processes, and are deploying to Linux targets using SSH and Mono, or to Windows tentacle targets running Windows versions earlier than 2012 R2, the proposed changes could impact you.

### How we propose to support dotnet-script

This RFC proposes removing `ScriptCS` in favour of `dotnet-script`.

To deploy software to your server we use [Tentacle](https://github.com/OctopusDeploy/OctopusTentacle), a lightweight service responsible for communicating with Octopus Server, and invoking [Calamari](https://github.com/OctopusDeploy/Calamari). Calamari is a command-line tool which knows how to perform the deployment, and is the host process for all deployment actions including script execution. We currently build Calamari for .Net Framework 4.0.0, 4.5.2 and netcore3.1, depending on your server OS, architecture version Tentacle will receive one of these Calamari builds. 

> Historically Calamari required Mono to be installed on your Linux targets to execute `ScriptCS` as it's built on the full .NET Framework. With the introduction of cross platform dotnet apps with netcore3.1 Linux can now natively run dotnet apps removing the complexity and overhead of Mono. Linux targets will receive the netcore3.1 Calamari by default with the exception of [Linux SSH targets](https://octopus.com/docs/infrastructure/deployment-targets/linux/ssh-target#add-an-ssh-connection) which can specify to run scripts on Mono.

Reviewer 2: Just a note on tense here - we're making a proposal which describes a _potential_ state. 

When talking about the changes we propose to make, we should use a conditional future tense - because it's not yet certain that we're going to do it. Definite future is something like "\<y> will happen". Conditional future is "If we did \<x>, \<y> would happen."

For example, what you've got right now is a definite future tense:

> Linux targets **will** receive the netcore3.1 Calamari

The "will" here can be read in different ways. I'd recommend to use "would" instead. This makes a much clearer distinction between what is current state and what we propose to change. It makes quite a difference just to change the "will" to a "would:

> Linux targets **would** receive the netcore3.1 Calamari

or, to be even more explicit, you could say:

> **If we were to** implement this change, Linux targets **would** receive the netcore3.1 Calamari

> `dotnet-script` is a modern implementation of C# scripting, built on dotnet, it can run on all targets that support dotnet apps (netcore3.1 and newer). This means Windows server versions will need to support dotnet apps to execute `dotnet-script`. Windows Server 2012 R2 only supports the full .Net Framework, meaning Windows Server 2012 R2 and earlier versions will no longer support C# scripting.

Reviewer 2: Likewise here, I find the use of "will" a little confusing. Let's be really explicit about what is potential future: 

> This means Windows server versions will need to support dotnet apps to execute `dotnet-script`. Windows Server 2012 R2 only supports the full .Net Framework, meaning Windows Server 2012 R2 and earlier versions will no longer support C# scripting.

could be much more clearly expressed as

> *If we made this change*, it *would* mean that C# scripts would only be able to be run on targets that support `dotnet`. Windows Server 2012 R2 and earlier only support .NET Framework, so these targets *would* lose the ability to run C# scripts.

## Impacts

> One of the tradeoffs of this change is that C# scripting will no longer be available on Linux deployment targets using SSH with Mono. If you wish to run C# scripts against your SSH linux targets, you will need to reconfigure your SSH targets to use the self-contained Calamari which runs via netcore3.1. To do this select the Self-Contained Calamari target runtime on your SSH target, a guide can be found [here](https://octopus.com/docs/infrastructure/deployment-targets/linux/ssh-target#self-contained-calamari). Targets using the Linux tentacle will continue to work as they always have.

Reviewer 2: The definite future vs conditional future stuff here is less important because of the context (Impacts). But if you wanted to, you could reword it with similar principles:

> One of the tradeoffs of this change would be that C# scripting would no longer be available... 
> If you wished to continue to run C# scripts against your SSH Linux targets, you would need to...

etc :)
